Let's talk about residual
variation really quickly before we
finish talking about our squared.
Residual variation is the variation
around the regression line.
So remember our residuals
are the vertical distances between
the outcomes and
the fitted regression line.
Remember if we include an intercept,
the residuals have to sum to zero,
which means their mean is zero.
So if we want to take
the variance of the residuals,
it's just the average of the squares.
So the sum of the squared residuals,
times one over n,
is an estimate of sigma squared.
The variation around the regression line.
The true population variation
around the regression line.
Now most people use n minus two,
instead of n.
So it's not the average squared residual,
it's kind of like the average
squared residual.
And, and for large n, the difference
between one over n minus two, and
one over n is irrelevant.
But for small n, it can make a difference.
The way to think about that is, remember,
if we include the intercept
the residuals have to sum to zero.
So, that puts a constraint.
If you know n minus one of them,
then, you know the nth.
Well, if you have a line term in there,
if you have a co-variant in there, then,
that puts a second
constrain on the residuals.
So, you lose two degrees of freedom.
If you put another regression variable
in there, you have another constraint,
you lose three degrees of freedom.
So in that sense it's sort of like saying
you really don't have n residuals,
you have n minus two of them,
because if you knew n minus two of them
you could figure out the last two.
And that's why it's one over n minus 2.
So let me show you how you can
grab the residual variation
out of your l m fit and
assign it to a variable.
This way if you needed, if you need to
work with it in an R program you can
actually grab the number,
not just see it on the printout.
So here I've defined my y and
my x, and I've defined my
fit as the regression model with y as
the outcome and x as the predictor.
Well if you just do summary of fit and
you don't do anything else,
you just hit return, it'll print out
the summary of the regression model.
Intercepts, slopes, estimated values,
and so on, and you'll see the residual
standard deviation estimate among
the elements in the printout.
However, if you want to grab it as an
object that you can assign to something,
just put dollar sign sigma.
Then you can assign sigma
to any other variable.
So if you're using it in
a program in some other way.
This works out in this particular
example to be 31.84 dollars.
So here, let's just confirm that I'm not
lying to you and that the formula works.
So if I do resid fit,
that grabs the residuals.
If I square it, it squares them.
If I sum it,
it adds up the squared values.
If I divide by n minus two, it takes
the average of the unique residuals.
And then if I square root it,
we get 31.84 so I wasn't lying.
Now let's go back to this plot where we
look at the total variability in diamond
prices.
And then compare what happens to
the variability when we explain
some of that variability
with a regression line.
So the total variability is
just the deviations of my data.
The average squared deviation
of my data around its mean.
Around the center.
And just to make things easy,
let's forget about the denominator and
just talk about the sum of
the squared deviations.
We might call the regression variability
as the component of that variability
that then gets explained
away by the regression line.
So we would take the points on
the regression line, the heights.
And that's the variability in the response
that's simply explained by the regression,
by the regression line.
Let's take how that,
how much that deviates around the average.
So that's the regression variability.
Then everything that's left over is that
variation around the regression line, and
that's the residual variability.
And the interesting identity, and
it kind of makes sense that this would be
the case, is that this total variability.
The variability in diamond prices
disregarding everything except for
where they're centered at.
Is equal to the regression variability,
that is the variability
explained by the model.
Plus the residual variability,
the variability left over
not explained by the model.
Because the residual variation and
the regression model variation
add up to the total variation.
We can define a quantity that represents
the percentage of the total variation
that's represented by the model.
Simply take the regression variation and
divide it by the total variation.
That quantity is called R squared.
So R squared for our diamond example,
is the percentage of the variation
in diamond price, that is explained by
the regression relationship with mass.
Some facts about R squared
that you need to keep in mind.
Just remind you, R squared is
the percentage of the variation in
the response explained by the linear
relationship with the predictor.
R squared has to be between zero and
one because the regression variability and
the error variability and the sums
of the squares add up to the total sums
of squares, and they're all positive.
So that forces our square
to be between zero and one.
If we define R as the sample correlation
between the predictor and the outcome,
then R squared is literally that
sample correlation R, squared.
R squared can be a misleading
summary of model fit.
For example, if you have somewhat
noisy data and delete all the,
a lot of the points in the middle,
you can get a much higher R squared.
Or if you just add arbitrary regression
variables into a linear model fit,
you increase R squared and
you de, decrease mean squared error where
the average squared residual variation.
So these things have to
be taken into a mind,
into mind if you're using
them to assess model fit.
Anscombe created a particularly stark
example of a bunch of data sets with
an equivalent R squared, equivalent mean,
and variances in the x's and the y's.
And identical regression relationships,
but when you look at the scatter clouds,
you can see that the fit has very
different meanings in each of the cases.
So, let's look at the outcome from that
example Anscombe, and see what it shows.
And here it is, the four data sets.
The first is a nice regression line,
exactly sort of along the lines
of what we think of, when we think of
just a slightly noisy x y relationship.
The second one,
clearly there's a missing term.
In order to address some of
this curvature in the data.
The third one, there's an outlier.
And in the fourth one, all the data
stacked up at one particular location.
And then there's one
point way out at the end.
So you could imagine getting this
if you had the first example and
you deleted a lot of
the points in the middle.
So in all these cases you
have an equivalent R squared.
But the summary to the single
number certainly has thrown out
a lot of the important information that
you get from a simple scatter plot.